---
layout: post
title: Basefile
subtitle: Storing files as a string
date: "2020-08-24"
---

Basefile is a ruby gem I am working on that will allow you to convert
a file (say an image) to a base64 string. The theory here is storing a
base64 string in a database or a redis key, and when you need it, pull it
and convert it back. Many people do this already as HTML supports using
base64 directly with the `src="data:image/png;base64, <base64 goes here>"`
attribute pattern.

My goal with basefile is to allow this to be done on the fly with 
raw file data. So for example with file sharing, the data over the wire
is potentially just a base64 string.

Basefile in its current state (version *0.2.0* at the time of writing) Does this
by shimming the ruby stdlib Base64 functions `encode64` and `decode64`. Basefile
exposes a `FileHandler` class that can be used to handle encoding input with 
the `.filein` attr and decoding to a file with the `.fileout` attr. A basic setup
would look like this


```ruby

require 'basefile'

# The input does not have to be an image
# its can be any static file.
my_input = "some_random_file.jpg"

# We create a new handler
file_handler = Basefile::FileHandler.new

# Set the input attribute to the input file
file_handler.filein = my_input

# The encode_file method will use the
# filein attribute and return a base64
# hash of the contents this is where we
# can for example store it in a database
# or redis key.
encoded_string = file_handler.encode_file 

# When we want it back we simply
# run that hash through the decoder
file_handler.fileout = "./my_new_file.jpg"

# This will write the image out to a new file
file_handler.decode_file(encoded_string)

``

